Once upon the time I have promised to give some explanation why in so much my social profiles I use the name of Russian battleship Retvisan (some can say that it was built in USA, by a local company William Krump & sons, but I see it another way as russian have paid for she so it is actually russian ship) .

So lets begin some journey into the Jungles of my mind. The times this ship was built were very complecated for the russian navy and for russian empire itself. Russian Empire suffered from political Problems which were caused by ancient social structure in the Empire herself. Since Alexander the 2 none of any significant political reforms were accomplished and archaic social structure was the major problem in the Empire.  This lack of political changes has also influenced the russian Admiralty whose organisation was splited into two parts which were MTK(Marine technical committee ru “Morskoi technicheskii komitet”) as well GMSh(The main naval stuff ru “Generalnyu morskoi shtab”).  So there was no any management structure which was responsible for organizing military plans and looking after the fleet commands as well how they are prepared for any military conflict. Technical requirements for the ships were developed independently and admirals themselves could only make suggestions but not consider about creating any unified tactical units which could be used in strategic plans .  May be reader of this article can resist me and tell that actually russian admirals have thought about it and even some technical requirements for battleships like Peresvet were done in taking into account using them in a company of longe range armored cruisers like Gromoboi,Rossia and Rurik. But main problem is that even when it was done the Admirals on the far East like Stark or Makarov(majority consider him as a best russian admiral of this time period but I personally find him as a worst one) have decided to accompany Peresvet ships to the rest of the main fleet in Port Arthur. So none of any strategic plans were done and Admirals were acting independently and all the fleets have not done any preparations for any kind of operations in the seas. So the lack of any social reforms has lead to stagnation  and hampered all the following events which happened with russian empire in the following decades (from 1895 till 1917).

But lets get back in the history of this one but remarkable ship, whose crew has done so much that she could continue to fight in any conditions.  The main trigger why she was built is the realizing the fact that russian main shipbuilders cannot built any significant ship which can sustain the concurrence  to any foreign projects(try to say none of the domestic ships of russian empire could be compared to top ones in foreign fleets). So it was decided to make contracts with foreign shipbuilders and try to buy projects which can be later copied and built on russian shipbuilding capacities. It was a right  move.  Actually russian has not organized any competition of projects for battleships like if has happened with cruisers (russia has bought 5 diffenet cruiser projects which were: Askold, Bogaryr,Novik,Boiarin and veryyyyy famous Variag ). So only 2 types were built Zesarevich and Retvisan , even Retvisan was part of the deal with Variag and contract was signed only because Krump had long time connections with russian admiralty since 1880s when his shipyard was repairing russian cruisers from far east. Retvisan had used a classical design and was similar to the existing projects, but used a full waterline protecting scheme  as well highly increased electrical system propulsion system. True to say that this ship was built with high precision and the quality was very high or even better what could reach British shipyards as for USA shipyard it was a chance to export  a ship on a market and gain advertisement for their shipyard capabilities which were increased since Theodor Roosvelt had announced the building  the White fleet.

So this ship was developed in a classic way, but with distinctive features that made a difference. As I have already written, ship had a full waterline coverage. But armor scheme was different in comparison the one used in Tsesarevich design, main difference was that the main armor belt was not prolonged along the whole waterline, but covered only a middle of the ship and the  ends were covered with 50mm armor plates. That was probably not the best solution but helped to reduce the whole time required to develop project. Actually it was the sufficient protection against the 150mm shells , as the ship got as well a protected deck (as all protected cruisers of that time had , like Aurora or Peresvet type Battleships), so even if 150mm shell would penetrate the weak 50mm protection the protected deck could help to slower the speed of flooing or even stop it, as well water herself would also slower the speed of the shell  trying to penetrate 50mm under 1 meter below the water line for example. So it was not the best but fast solution. Later for example in the same way the Battleship Potemkin Tavricheskii (yes this famous one), but in that case the thicker 75 mm plates were placed. Of course, these armor scheme was not ideal, but it helped easier to get a battleship  with characteristics of a next  generation . 

